Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes
with functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):
1. Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at
least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and
that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational
activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior,
defiance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older
adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are
required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in
schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses
details, work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has
difficulty remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy
reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems
elsewhere, even in the absence of any obvious distraction).
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but
quickly loses focus and is easily sidetracked).
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing
sequential tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order;
messy, disorganized work; has poor time management; fails to meet
deadlines).
f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require
sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older
adolescents and adults, preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing
lengthy papers).
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials,
pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile
telephones).
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and
adults, may include unrelated thoughts).
i. Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for
older adolescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills, keeping
appointments).
2. Hyperactivity and impulsivity: Six (or more) of the following symptoms
have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with
developmental level and that negatively impacts directly on social and
academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior,
defiance, hostility, or a failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older
adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are
required.
a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g.,
leaves his or her place in the classroom, in the office or other workplace,
or in other situations that require remaining in place).
c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate. (Note: In
adolescents or adults, may be limited to feeling restless.)
d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.
e. Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is unable to be or
uncomfortable being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings;
may be experienced by others as being restless or difficult to keep up
with).
f. Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g.,
completes people’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation).
h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line).
i. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations,
games, or activities; may start using other people’s things without asking
or receiving permission; for adolescents and adults, may intrude into or
take over what others are doing).
B. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age
12 years.
C. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present in two or
more settings (e.g., at home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other
activities).
D. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of,
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or
another psychotic disorder and are not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., mood disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality
disorder, substance intoxication or withdrawal).
Specify whether:
F90.2 Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Criterion
A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for the past 6 months.
F90.0 Predominantly inattentive presentation: If Criterion A1 (inattention) is
met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
F90.1 Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation: If Criterion A2
(hyperactivity-impulsivity) is met and Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the
past 6 months.
Specify if:
In partial remission: When full criteria were previously met, fewer than the full
criteria have been met for the past 6 months, and the symptoms still result in
impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.

Specify current severity:
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, and symptoms result in no more than minor impairments in social or
occupational functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and “severe” are
present.
Severe: Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis, or
several symptoms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms
result in marked impairment in social or occupational functioning.