Functional Consequences of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
ADHD is associated with reduced school performance and academic attainment. Academic
deficits, school-related problems, and peer neglect tend to be most associated with elevated

symptoms of inattention, whereas peer rejection and, to a lesser extent, accidental injury are most
salient with marked symptoms of hyperactivity or impulsivity. Inadequate or variable self-
application to tasks that require sustained effort is often interpreted by others as laziness,
irresponsibility, or failure to cooperate.
Young adults with ADHD have poor job stability. Adults with ADHD show poorer
occupational performance, attainment, attendance, and higher probability of unemployment, as
well as elevated interpersonal conflict. On average, individuals with ADHD obtain less
schooling, have poorer vocational achievement, and have reduced intellectual scores than their
peers, although there is great variability. In its severe form, the disorder is markedly impairing,
affecting social, familial, and scholastic/occupational adjustment.
Family relationships may be characterized by discord and negative interactions. Individuals
with ADHD have lower self-esteem relative to peers without ADHD. Peer relationships are often
disrupted by peer rejection, neglect, or teasing of the individual with ADHD.
Children with ADHD are significantly more likely than their peers without ADHD to
develop conduct disorder in adolescence and antisocial personality disorder in adulthood,
consequently increasing the likelihood for substance use disorders and incarceration. The risk of
subsequent substance use disorders is elevated, especially when conduct disorder or antisocial
personality disorder develops.
Individuals with ADHD are more likely than peers to be injured. Children and adults with
ADHD are at higher risk for suffering trauma and developing subsequent posttraumatic stress
syndrome. Traffic accidents and violations are more frequent in drivers with ADHD. Individuals
with ADHD have a higher overall mortality rate, largely because of accidents and injuries. There
may also be an elevated likelihood of obesity and hypertension among individuals with ADHD.