Differential Diagnosis
Oppositional defiant disorder. Individuals with oppositional defiant disorder may resist work or
school tasks that require self-application because they resist conforming to others' demands.
Their behavior is characterized by negativity, hostility, and defiance. These symptoms must be
differentiated from aversion to school or mentally demanding tasks because of difficulty in
sustaining mental effort, forgetting instructions, and impulsivity in individuals with ADHD.
Complicating the differential diagnosis is the fact that some individuals with ADHD may
develop secondary oppositional attitudes toward such tasks and devalue their importance.
Intermittent explosive disorder. ADHD and intermittent explosive disorder share high levels of
impulsive behavior. However, individuals with intermittent explosive disorder show serious
aggression toward others, which is not characteristic of ADHD, and they do not experience
problems with sustaining attention as seen in ADHD. In addition, intermittent explosive disorder
is rare in childhood. Intermittent explosive disorder may be diagnosed in the presence of ADHD.
Other neurodevelopmental disorders. The increased motoric activity that may occur in ADHD must
be distinguished from the repetitive motor behavior that characterizes stereotypic movement
disorder and some cases of autism spectrum disorder. In stereotypic movement disorder, the
motoric behavior is generally fixed and repetitive (e.g., body rocking, self-biting), whereas the
fidgetiness and restlessness in ADHD are typically generalized and not characterized by
repetitive stereotypic movements. In Tourette’s disorder, frequent multiple tics can be mistaken
for the generalized fidgetiness of ADHD. Prolonged observation may be needed to differentiate
fidgetiness from bouts of multiple tics.
Specific learning disorder. Children with specific learning disorder alone may appear inattentive
because of frustration, lack of interest, or limited ability in neurocognitive

processes, including working memory and processing speed, whereas their inattention is much
reduced when performing a skill that does not require the impaired cognitive process.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability). Symptoms of ADHD are common in
children with intellectual developmental disorder placed in academic settings that are
inappropriate to their intellectual ability. In such cases, the symptoms are not evident during
nonacademic tasks. A diagnosis of ADHD in intellectual developmental disorder requires that
inattention or hyperactivity be excessive for mental age.
Autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with ADHD and those with autism spectrum disorder
exhibit inattention, social dysfunction, and difficult-to-manage behavior. The social dysfunction
and peer rejection seen in individuals with ADHD must be distinguished from the social
disengagement, isolation, and indifference to facial and tonal communication cues seen in
individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Children with autism spectrum disorder may display
tantrums because of an inability to tolerate a change from their expected course of events. In
contrast, children with ADHD may misbehave or have a tantrum during a major transition
because of impulsivity or poor self-control.
Reactive attachment disorder. Children with reactive attachment disorder may show social
disinhibition, but not the full ADHD symptom cluster, and display other features such as a lack
of enduring relationships that are not characteristic of ADHD.
Anxiety disorders. ADHD shares symptoms of inattention with anxiety disorders. Individuals
with ADHD are inattentive because of their preferential engagement with novel and stimulating
activities or preoccupation with enjoyable activities. This is distinguished from the inattention
attributable to worry and rumination seen in anxiety disorders. Restlessness might be seen in
anxiety disorders. However, in ADHD, the symptom is not associated with worry and
rumination.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Concentration difficulties associated with posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) may be misdiagnosed in children as ADHD. Children younger than 6 years
often manifest PTSD in nonspecific symptoms such as restlessness, irritability, inattention, and
poor concentration, which can mimic ADHD. Parents may also minimize their children’s
trauma-related symptoms, and teachers and other caregivers are often unaware of the child’s
exposure to traumatic events. A comprehensive assessment of past exposure to traumatic events
can rule out PTSD.
Depressive disorders. Individuals with depressive disorders may present with inability to
concentrate. However, poor concentration in mood disorders becomes prominent only during a
depressive episode.
Bipolar disorder. Individuals with bipolar disorder may have increased activity, poor
concentration, and increased impulsivity, but these features are episodic, unlike ADHD, in which
the symptoms are persistent. Moreover, in bipolar disorder, increased impulsivity or inattention
is accompanied by elevated mood, grandiosity, and other specific bipolar features. Children with
ADHD may show significant changes in mood within the same day; such lability is distinct from
a manic or hypomanic episode, which must last 4 or more days to be a clinical indicator of
bipolar disorder, even in children. Bipolar disorder is rare in preadolescents, even when severe
irritability and anger are prominent, whereas ADHD is common among children and adolescents
who display excessive anger and irritability.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by
pervasive irritability, and intolerance of frustration, but impulsiveness and disorganized attention
are not essential features. However, most children and adolescents with the disorder also have
symptoms that meet criteria for ADHD, which is diagnosed separately.
Substance use disorders. Differentiating ADHD from substance use disorders may be problematic
if the first presentation of ADHD symptoms follows the onset of abuse or

frequent use. Clear evidence of ADHD before substance misuse from informants or previous
records may be essential for differential diagnosis.
Personality disorders. In adolescents and adults, it may be difficult to distinguish ADHD from
borderline, narcissistic, and other personality disorders. Some personality disorders tend to share
the features of disorganization, social intrusiveness, emotional dysregulation, and cognitive
dysregulation. However, ADHD is not characterized by fear of abandonment, self-injury,
extreme ambivalence, or other features of personality disorder. It may take extended clinical
observation, informant interview, or detailed history to distinguish impulsive, socially intrusive,
or inappropriate behavior from narcissistic, aggressive, or domineering behavior to make this
differential diagnosis.
Psychotic disorders. ADHD is not diagnosed if the symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity
occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic disorder.
Medication-induced symptoms of ADHD. Symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, or impulsivity
attributable to the use of medication (e.g., bronchodilators, isoniazid, neuroleptics [resulting in
akathisia], thyroid replacement medication) are diagnosed as other specified or unspecified other
(or unknown) substance–related disorders.
Neurocognitive disorders. While impairment in complex attention may be one of the affected
cognitive domains in a neurocognitive disorder, it must represent a decline from a previous level
of performance in order to justify a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Moreover, major or mild neurocognitive disorder typically has its onset in adulthood. In contrast,
the inattention in ADHD must have been present prior to age 12 and does not represent a decline
from previous functioning.