Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a persistent pattern of
inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.
Inattention manifests behaviorally in ADHD as wandering off task, failing to follow through on
instructions or finishing work or chores, having difficulty sustaining focus, and being
disorganized and is not attributable to defiance or lack of comprehension. Hyperactivity refers to
excessive motor activity (such as a child running about) when it is not appropriate, or excessive
fidgeting, tapping, or talkativeness. In adults, hyperactivity may manifest as extreme restlessness
or wearing others out with their activity. Impulsivity refers to hasty actions that occur in the
moment without forethought, which may have potential for harm to the individual (e.g., darting
into the street without looking). Impulsivity may reflect a desire for immediate rewards or an
inability to delay gratification. Impulsive behaviors may manifest as social intrusiveness (e.g.,
interrupting others excessively) and/or as making important decisions without consideration of
long-term consequences (e.g., taking a job without adequate information).
ADHD begins in childhood. The requirement that several symptoms be present before age 12
years conveys the importance of a substantial clinical presentation during childhood. At the same
time, an earlier age at onset is not specified because of difficulties in establishing precise
childhood onset retrospectively. Adult recall of childhood symptoms tends to be unreliable, and
it is beneficial to obtain ancillary information. ADHD cannot be diagnosed in the absence of any
symptoms prior to age 12. When symptoms of what appears to be ADHD first occur after age 13,
they are more likely to be explained by another mental disorder or to represent the cognitive
effects of substance use.
Manifestations of the disorder must be present in more than one setting (e.g., home and
school, or home and work). Confirmation of substantial symptoms across settings typically
cannot be done accurately without consulting informants who have seen the individual in those
settings. Typically, symptoms vary depending on context within a given setting. Signs of the
disorder may be minimal or absent when the individual is receiving frequent rewards for
appropriate behavior, is under close supervision, is in a novel setting, is engaged in especially
interesting activities, has consistent external stimulation (e.g., via electronic screens), or is
interacting in one-on-one situations (e.g., the clinician's office).