Differential Diagnosis
Generalized anxiety disorder. Separation anxiety disorder is distinguished from generalized anxiety
disorder in that the anxiety in separation anxiety disorder predominantly concerns real or
imagined separation from attachment figures. Furthermore, if other worries occur, they are not
excessive.
Panic disorder. In separation anxiety disorder, threats of separation from close attachments may
lead to extreme anxiety and panic attacks. In contrast to panic disorder, where panic attacks
occur unexpectedly and are usually accompanied by fears of dying or going “crazy,” the panic
attacks in separation anxiety disorder occur in anticipation of real or imagined separations from
attachment figures or places of safety and security, or from worries that untoward events will
befall the individual’s close attachments.
Agoraphobia. Unlike individuals with agoraphobia, those with separation anxiety disorder are not
anxious about being trapped or incapacitated in situations from which escape is perceived as
difficult in the event of panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms. Instead, they fear
being away from places of safety associated with their major attachment figures.

Conduct disorder. School avoidance (truancy) is common in conduct disorder, but anxiety about
separation is not responsible for school absences, and the child or adolescent usually stays away
from, rather than returns to, the home.
Social anxiety disorder. School refusal may be attributable to social anxiety disorder. In such
instances, the school avoidance is due to fear of being judged negatively by others rather than
due to worries about being separated from attachment figures.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Fear of separation from loved ones is common after a traumatic
event such as a major disaster, particularly when periods of separation from loved ones are
experienced during the traumatic event. In posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the central
symptoms concern intrusions about, and avoidance of, memories associated with the traumatic
event itself, whereas in separation anxiety disorder, the worries and avoidance concern the well-
being of attachment figures and separation from them.
Illness anxiety disorder. Separation anxiety disorder concerns worries about the health and well-
being of close attachments. In contrast, individuals with illness anxiety disorder worry about
specific medical illnesses they themselves may have, not about them being separated from their
close attachments.
Prolonged grief disorder. Intense yearning or longing for the deceased, intense sorrow and
emotional pain, and preoccupation with the deceased or the circumstances of the death are
expected responses occurring in prolonged grief disorder, whereas fear of possible separation
from key attachment figures is central in separation anxiety disorder.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. These disorders may be associated with reluctance to leave
home, but the main concern is not worry or fear of untoward events befalling attachment figures,
but rather low motivation for engaging with the outside world. However, individuals with
separation anxiety disorder may become depressed while being separated or in anticipation of
separation.
Oppositional defiant disorder. Children and adolescents with separation anxiety disorder may be
oppositional in the context of being forced to separate from attachment figures. Oppositional
defiant disorder should be considered only when there is persistent oppositional behavior
unrelated to the anticipation or occurrence of separation from attachment figures.
Psychotic disorders. Unlike the hallucinations in psychotic disorders, the unusual perceptual
experiences that may occur in separation anxiety disorder are usually based on a misperception
of an actual stimulus, occur only in certain situations (e.g., nighttime), and are reversed by the
presence of an attachment figure.
Personality disorders. Dependent personality disorder is characterized by an indiscriminate
tendency to rely on others, whereas separation anxiety disorder involves concern about the
proximity and safety of key attachment figures. Borderline personality disorder is characterized
by fear of abandonment by loved ones, but problems in identity, self-direction, interpersonal
functioning, and impulsivity are additionally central to that disorder, whereas they are not central
to separation anxiety disorder.