Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of separation anxiety disorder is excessive fear or anxiety concerning
separation from home or attachment figures. The anxiety exceeds what may be expected given
the individual’s developmental level (Criterion A). Individuals with separation anxiety disorder
have symptoms that meet at least three of the following criteria: They experience recurrent
excessive distress when separation from home or major attachment figures is anticipated or
occurs (Criterion A1). They worry about the well-being or death of attachment figures,
particularly when separated from them, and they need to know the whereabouts of their
attachment figures and want to stay in touch with them (Criterion A2). They also worry about
untoward events to themselves, such as getting lost, being kidnapped, or having an accident, that
would keep them from ever being reunited with their major attachment figure (Criterion A3).
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder are reluctant or refuse to go out by themselves
because of separation fears (Criterion A4). They have

persistent and excessive fear or reluctance about being alone or without major attachment figures
at home or in other settings. Children with separation anxiety disorder may be unable to stay or
go in a room by themselves and may display “clinging” behavior, staying close to or
“shadowing” the parent around the house, or requiring someone to be with them when going to
another room in the house (Criterion A5). They have persistent reluctance or refusal to go to
sleep without being near a major attachment figure or to sleep away from home (Criterion A6).
Children with this disorder often have difficulty at bedtime and may insist that someone stay
with them until they fall asleep. During the night, they may make their way to their parents’ bed
(or that of a significant other, such as a sibling). Children may be reluctant or refuse to attend
camp, to sleep at friends’ homes, or to go on errands. Adults may be uncomfortable when
traveling independently (e.g., sleeping in a hotel room away from home or attachment figures).
There may be repeated nightmares in which the content expresses the individual’s separation
anxiety (e.g., destruction of the family through fire, murder, or other catastrophe) (Criterion A7).
Physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, abdominal complaints, nausea, vomiting) are common in
children when separation from major attachment figures occurs or is anticipated (Criterion A8).
Cardiovascular symptoms such as palpitations, dizziness, and feeling faint are rare in younger
children but may occur in adolescents and adults.
The disturbance must last for a period of at least 4 weeks in children and adolescents younger
than 18 years and is typically 6 months or longer in adults (Criterion B). However, the duration
criterion for adults should be used as a general guide, with allowance for some degree of
flexibility. The disturbance must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C).