Diagnostic Criteria
F93.0
A. Developmentally inappropriate and excessive fear or anxiety concerning
separation from those to whom the individual is attached, as evidenced by at
least three of the following:
1. Recurrent excessive distress when anticipating or experiencing separation
from home or from major attachment figures.
2. Persistent and excessive worry about losing major attachment figures or
about possible harm to them, such as illness, injury, disasters, or death.
3. Persistent and excessive worry about experiencing an untoward event (e.g.,
getting lost, being kidnapped, having an accident, becoming ill) that causes
separation from a major attachment figure.
4. Persistent reluctance or refusal to go out, away from home, to school, to
work, or elsewhere because of fear of separation.
5. Persistent and excessive fear of or reluctance about being alone or without
major attachment figures at home or in other settings.
6. Persistent reluctance or refusal to sleep away from home or to go to sleep
without being near a major attachment figure.
7. Repeated nightmares involving the theme of separation.
8. Repeated complaints of physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, stomachaches,
nausea, vomiting) when separation from major attachment figures occurs or
is anticipated.
B. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, lasting at least 4 weeks in children
and adolescents and typically 6 months or more in adults.
C. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
refusing to leave home because of excessive resistance to change in autism
spectrum disorder; delusions or hallucinations concerning separation in
psychotic disorders; refusal to go outside without a trusted companion in
agoraphobia; worries about ill health or other harm befalling significant others in
generalized anxiety disorder; or concerns about having an illness in illness
anxiety disorder.