Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal social
communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from early childhood
and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at which functional
impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of the individual and his or
her environment. Core diagnostic features are evident in the developmental period, but
intervention, compensation, and current supports may mask difficulties in at least some contexts.
Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly depending on the severity of the autistic
condition, developmental level, chronological age, and possibly gender; hence, the term
spectrum. Individuals without cognitive or language impairment may have more subtle
manifestation of deficits (e.g., Criterion A, Criterion B) than individuals with accompanying
intellectual or language impairments and may be making great efforts to mask these deficits.
Criterion A deficits in social communication will be more subtle if an individual has better
overall communication skills (e.g., is verbally fluent, does not have intellectual impairments).
Similarly, Criterion B deficits (i.e., restricted patterns of behavior and interests) may be less
obvious if the interests are closer to age-typical norms (e.g., Ancient Egypt or trains as compared
to wiggling a string). Autism spectrum disorder encompasses disorders previously referred to as
early infantile autism, childhood autism, Kanner’s autism, high-functioning autism, atypical
autism, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, childhood disintegrative
disorder, and Asperger’s disorder.
The impairments in social communication and social interaction specified in Criterion A are
pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most valid and reliable when based on multiple sources
of information, including clinician’s observations, caregiver history, and, when possible, self-
report. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying manifestations,
depending on the individual’s age, intellectual level, and language ability, as well as other factors
such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals have language deficits, ranging
from complete lack of speech through language delays, poor comprehension of speech, echoed
speech, or stilted and overly literal language. Even when formal language skills (e.g.,
vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for reciprocal social communication is
impaired in autism spectrum disorder.
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e., the ability to engage with others and share
thoughts and feelings) may be shown, for example, in young children with little or no initiation
of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with reduced or absent imitation of
others’ behavior. What language exists is often one-sided, lacking in social reciprocity, and used
to request or label rather than to comment, share feelings, or converse. In older children and
adults without intellectual impairments or language delays, deficits in

social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and responding
to complex social cues (e.g., when and how to join a conversation, what not to say). Individuals
who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still struggle in novel or
unsupported situations and suffer from the effort and anxiety of consciously calculating what is
socially intuitive for most individuals. This behavior may contribute to lower ascertainment of
autism spectrum disorder in these individuals, perhaps especially in adult women. Thus, longer
assessments, observation in naturalistic settings, and inquiring about any tolls of social
interaction may be needed. If asked about the costs of social interaction, for example, these
individuals might respond that social interactions are exhausting for them, that they are unable to
concentrate because of the mental effort in monitoring social conventions, that their self-esteem
is adversely affected by being unable to be themselves, and so forth.
Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction are manifested by
absent, reduced, or atypical use of eye contact (relative to cultural norms), gestures, facial
expressions, body orientation, or speech intonation. An early feature of autism spectrum disorder
is impaired joint attention as manifested by a lack of pointing, showing, or bringing objects to
share interest with others, or failure to follow someone’s pointing or eye gaze. Individuals may
learn a few functional gestures, but their repertoire is smaller than that of others, and they often
fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in communication. Among young people and adults
with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal communication with speech may
give the impression of odd, wooden, or exaggerated “body language” during interactions.
Impairment may be relatively subtle within individual modes (e.g., someone may have relatively
good eye contact when speaking) but noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body
posture, prosody, and facial expression for social communication, or in difficulty maintaining
these for sustained periods or when under stress.
Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships should be judged
against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atypical social
interest, manifested by rejection of others, passivity, or inappropriate approaches that seem
aggressive or disruptive. These difficulties are particularly evident in young children, in whom
there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g., age-appropriate flexible pretend
play) and, later, insistence on playing by very fixed rules. Older individuals may struggle to
understand what behavior is considered appropriate in one situation but not another (e.g., casual
behavior during a job interview), or the different ways that language may be used to
communicate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an apparent preference for solitary activities
or for interacting with much younger or older people. Frequently, there is a desire to establish
friendships without a complete or realistic idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sided
friendships or friendships based solely on shared special interests). Relationships with siblings,
coworkers, and caregivers are also important to consider (in terms of reciprocity).
Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations
according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive
behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flapping, finger flicking), repetitive use
of objects (e.g., spinning coins, lining up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echolalia, the delayed
or immediate parroting of heard words; use of “you” when referring to self; stereotyped use of
words, phrases, or prosodic patterns). Excessive adherence to routines and restricted patterns of
behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., distress at apparently small changes, such
as taking an alternative route to school or work; insistence on adherence to rules; rigidity of
thinking) or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., repetitive questioning,
pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests in autism spectrum disorder tend to be
abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., a toddler strongly attached to a pan or piece of string; a child
preoccupied with vacuum

cleaners; an adult spending hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines
may relate to apparent hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, manifested through extreme
responses to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination
with lights or spinning objects, and sometimes apparent indifference to pain, heat, or cold.
Extreme reaction to or rituals involving taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food or excessive
food restrictions are common and may be a presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder without intellectual or language
impairments learn to suppress repetitive behavior in public. In these individuals, repetitive
behaviors like rocking or finger flicking may serve an anxiolytic or self-soothing function.
Special interests may be a source of pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for
education and employment later in life. Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive
patterns of behavior, interests, or activities were clearly present during childhood or at some time
in the past, even if symptoms are no longer present.
Criterion D requires that the features must cause clinically significant impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of current functioning. Criterion E specifies that the social
communication deficits, although sometimes accompanied by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability), are not in line with the individual’s developmental level;
impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level.
Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties, including
caregiver interviews, questionnaires and clinician observation measures, are available and can
improve reliability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians. However, the symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder occur as dimensions without universally accepted cutoff scores for
what would constitute a disorder. Thus, the diagnosis remains a clinical one, taking all available
information into account, and is not solely dictated by the score on a particular questionnaire or
observation measure.