Functional Consequences of Autism Spectrum Disorder
In young children with autism spectrum disorder, lack of social and communication abilities may
hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings with peers. In the
home, insistence on routines and aversion to change, as well as sensory sensitivities, may
interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts, dental work) extremely
difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Extreme difficulties in planning,
organization, and coping with change negatively impact academic achievement, even for
students with above-average intelligence. During adulthood, these individuals may have
difficulties establishing independence because of continued rigidity and difficulty with novelty.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder, even without intellectual developmental
disorder, have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such

as independent living and gainful employment. Functional consequences in old age are
unknown, but social isolation and communication problems (e.g., reduced help-seeking) are
likely to have consequences for health in older adulthood.
Co-occurring intellectual developmental disorder, epilepsy, mental disorders, and chronic
medical conditions may be associated with a higher risk of premature mortality for individuals
with autism spectrum disorder. Deaths from injury and poisoning are higher than for the general
population, as are deaths from suicide. Drowning is the leading cause of accidental death in
children with autism spectrum disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or easily
distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hyperactivity.
Moreover, some individuals with ADHD may exhibit social communication deficits such as
interrupting others, speaking too loudly, and not respecting personal space. Although potentially
difficult to discriminate ADHD from autism spectrum disorder, the developmental course and
absence of restricted, repetitive behaviors and unusual interests in ADHD help in differentiating
the two conditions. A concurrent diagnosis of ADHD should be considered when attentional
difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in individuals of comparable mental age,
and ADHD is one of the most common comorbidities in autism spectrum disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) without autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual
developmental disorder without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to differentiate from
autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with intellectual developmental
disorder who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a challenge for
differential diagnosis, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individuals as well. A
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an individual with intellectual developmental disorder
is appropriate when social communication and interaction are significantly impaired relative to
the developmental level of the individual’s nonverbal skills (e.g., fine motor skills, nonverbal
problem solving). In contrast, intellectual developmental disorder is the appropriate diagnosis
when there is no apparent discrepancy between the level of social communicative skills and other
intellectual skills.
Language disorders and social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In some forms of language
disorder, there may be problems of communication and some secondary social difficulties.
However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnormal nonverbal
communication, nor with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or
activities.
When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions but
does not show restricted and repetitive behavior or interests, criteria for social (pragmatic)
communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of social (pragmatic) communication disorder
whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder are met, and care should be taken to enquire
carefully regarding past or current restricted/repetitive behavior.
Selective mutism. In selective mutism, early development is not typically disturbed. The affected
child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts and settings. Even in
settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired, nor are restricted or repetitive
patterns of behavior present.
Stereotypic movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic characteristics of
autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
given when such repetitive behaviors are better explained by the presence

of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a focus
of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate.
Rett syndrome. Disruption of social interaction may be observed during the regressive phase of
Rett syndrome (typically between ages 1 and 4 years); thus, a substantial proportion of affected
young girls may have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder.
However, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome improve their social
communication skills, and autistic features are no longer a major area of concern. Consequently,
autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all diagnostic criteria are met.
Symptoms associated with anxiety disorders. The overlap of anxiety symptoms with the core
symptoms of autism spectrum disorder can make the classification of anxiety symptoms in
autism spectrum disorder challenging. For example, social withdrawal and repetitive behaviors
are core features of autism spectrum disorder but may also be expressions of anxiety. The most
common anxiety disorders in autism spectrum disorder are specific phobia (in up to 30% of
cases), and social anxiety and agoraphobia (in as many as 17% of cases).
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Repetitive behavior is a defining feature of both obsessive-
compulsive disorder and autism spectrum disorder. In both conditions, repetitive behaviors are
considered to be inappropriate or odd. In obsessive-compulsive disorder, intrusive thoughts are
often related to contamination, organization, or sexual or religious themes. Compulsions are
performed in response to these intrusive thoughts in attempts to relieve anxiety. In autism
spectrum disorder, repetitive behaviors classically include more stereotyped motor behaviors,
such as hand flapping and finger shaking or more complex behaviors, such as insistence on
routines or lining up objects. Contrary to obsessive-compulsive disorder, repetitive behaviors in
autism spectrum disorder may be perceived as pleasurable and reinforcing.
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of normal, or
near normal, development. A prodromal state has been described in which social impairment and
atypical interests and beliefs occur, which could be confused with the social deficits and
restricted fixated interests seen in autism spectrum disorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which
are defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. However,
clinicians must take into account the potential for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to
be concrete in their interpretation of questions regarding the key features of schizophrenia (e.g.,
“Do you hear voices when no one is there?” ”Yes [on the radio]”). Autism spectrum disorder and
schizophrenia can co-occur, and both should be diagnosed when criteria are met.
Personality disorders. In adults without intellectual developmental disorder or significant
language impairment, some behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder may be
perceived by others as symptoms of narcissistic, schizotypal, or schizoid personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder in particular may intersect with autism spectrum disorder in
unusual preoccupations and perceptual experiences, odd thinking and speech, constricted affect
and social anxiety, lack of close friends, and odd or eccentric behavior. The early developmental
course of autism spectrum disorder (lack of imaginative play, restricted/repetitive behavior,
sensory sensitivities) is most helpful in differentiating it from personality disorders.