Diagnostic Criteria F84.0
A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple
contexts, as manifested by all of the following, currently or by history (examples
are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal
social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced
sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to
social interactions.
2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction,
ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal
communication; to abnormalities in eye contact and body language or deficits
in understanding and use of gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and
nonverbal communication.
3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging,
for example, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts;
to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of
interest in peers.
B. Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested
by at least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative,
not exhaustive; see text):
1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g.,
simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia,
idiosyncratic phrases).

2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized
patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small
changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals,
need to take same route or eat same food every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g.,
strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively
circumscribed or perseverative interests).
4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory
aspects of the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature,
adverse response to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or
touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement).
C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not
become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be
masked by learned strategies in later life).
D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of current functioning.
E. These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability) or global developmental delay. Intellectual
developmental disorder and autism spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to
make comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
developmental disorder, social communication should be below that expected for
general developmental level.
Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder,
Asperger’s disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified
should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have
marked deficits in social communication, but whose symptoms do not otherwise
meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should be evaluated for social
(pragmatic) communication disorder.
Specify current severity based on social communication impairments and restricted,
repetitive patterns of behavior (see Table 2):
Requiring very substantial support
Requiring substantial support
Requiring support
Specify if:
With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
With or without accompanying language impairment
Specify if:
Associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or
environmental factor (Coding note: Use additional code to identify the
associated genetic or other medical condition.)
Associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition) (Coding note: Use additional code F06.1
catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of
the comorbid catatonia.)

TABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder (examples of level of
support needs)
Severity level Social communication Restricted, repetitive behaviors
Level 3 Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty
communication skills cause severe impairments coping with change, or other
“Requiring very substantial
in functioning, very limited initiation of social restricted/repetitive behaviors markedly
support”
interactions, and minimal response to social interfere with functioning in all spheres.
overtures from others. For example, a person Great distress/difficulty changing focus or
with few words of intelligible speech who rarely action.
initiates interaction and, when he or she does,
makes unusual approaches to meet needs only
and responds to only very direct social
approaches.
Level 2 Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping
communication skills; social impairments with change, or other restricted/repetitive
“Requiring substantial
apparent even with supports in place; limited behaviors appear frequently enough to be
support”
initiation of social interactions; and reduced or obvious to the casual observer and
abnormal responses to social overtures from interfere with functioning in a variety of
others. For example, a person who speaks contexts. Distress and/or difficulty
simple sentences, whose interaction is limited to changing focus or action.
narrow special interests, and who has markedly
odd nonverbal communication.
Level 1 Without supports in place, deficits in social Inflexibility of behavior causes significant
communication cause noticeable impairments. interference with functioning in one or
“Requiring support”
Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear more contexts. Difficulty switching
examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses between activities. Problems of
to social overtures of others. May appear to organization and planning hamper
have decreased interest in social interactions. independence.
For example, a person who is able to speak in
full sentences and engages in communication
but whose to-and-fro conversation with others
fails, and whose attempts to make friends are
odd and typically unsuccessful.
Recording Procedures
It may be helpful to note level of support needed for each of the two core psychopathological
domains in Table 2 (e.g., “requiring very substantial support for deficits in social communication
and requiring substantial support for restricted, repetitive behaviors”). Specification of “with
accompanying intellectual impairment” or “without accompanying

intellectual impairment” should be recorded next. Language impairment specification should be
recorded thereafter. If there is accompanying language impairment, the current level of verbal
functioning should be recorded (e.g., “with accompanying language impairment—no intelligible
speech” or “with accompanying language impairment—phrase speech”).
For autism spectrum disorder for which the specifiers “associated with a known genetic or
other medical condition or environmental factor” or “associated with a neurodevelopmental,
mental, or behavioral problem” are appropriate, record autism spectrum disorder associated with
(name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with tuberous
sclerosis complex). These specifiers apply to presentations in which the listed condition or
problem is potentially relevant to the clinical care of the individual and do not necessarily
indicate that the condition or problem is causally related to the autism spectrum disorder. If the
associated neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem meets criteria for a
neurodevelopmental or other mental disorder, both autism spectrum disorder and the other
disorder should be diagnosed.
If catatonia is present, record separately “catatonia associated with autism spectrum
disorder.” For more information, see criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
Specifiers
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current
symptomatology (which might fall below level 1), with the recognition that severity may vary by
context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and restricted,
repetitive behaviors should be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories should not be
used to determine eligibility for and provision of services. Indeed, individuals with relatively
better skills overall may experience different or even greater psychosocial challenges. Thus,
service needs can only be developed at an individual level and through discussion of personal
priorities and targets.
Regarding the specifier “with or without accompanying intellectual impairment,”
understanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum
disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and
nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential strengths in
individuals with limited language).
To use the specifier “with or without accompanying language impairment,” the current level
of verbal functioning should be assessed and described. Examples of the specific descriptions for
“with accompanying language impairment” might include no intelligible speech (nonverbal),
single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals “without accompanying
language impairment” might be further described as speaks in full sentences or has fluent speech.
Since receptive language may lag behind expressive language development in autism spectrum
disorder, receptive and expressive language skills should be considered separately.
The specifier “associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental
factor” can be applied when an individual has a known genetic condition (e.g., Rett syndrome,
fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a known medical condition (e.g., epilepsy), or a history of
environmental exposure in utero to a known teratogen or infection (e.g., fetal valproate
syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal rubella). This specifier should not be viewed as
synonymous with causation of autism spectrum disorder. A condition may be listed as being
associated with autism spectrum disorder when it is thought to be potentially clinically relevant
or inform care and not because the clinician is asserting a cause. Examples include autism
spectrum disorder associated with a unique genomic copy number variant that could be clinically
relevant even if the specific abnormality may not have directly caused nor have previously been
linked to autism spectrum disorder, or Crohn’s disease, which could exacerbate behavioral
symptoms.

The specifier “associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem” can be
applied to indicate problems (e.g., irritability, sleep problems, self-injurious behavior, or
developmental regression) that contribute to the functional formulation or are a focus of
treatment. Additional neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorders should also be noted
as separate diagnoses (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination
disorder; disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or
bipolar disorders; tics or Tourette’s disorder; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders).
Catatonia can occur as a comorbid condition with autism spectrum disorder. In addition to
classic symptoms of posturing, negativism (opposition or no response to instructions or external
stimuli), mutism, and stupor, an increase or worsening of stereotypy and self-injurious behavior
may form part of the symptom complex of catatonia in the setting of autism spectrum disorder.