Differential Diagnosis” for this disorder).
First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language
development, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g.,
pulling individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g.,
carrying toys around but never playing with them), and unusual communication patterns (e.g.,
knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be suspected but is
typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors and the absence of
typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing young children have strong
preferences and enjoy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods, watching the same video multiple
times), distinguishing restricted and repetitive behaviors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum
disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The clinical distinction is based on the type, frequency,
and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a child who daily lines up objects for hours and is very
distressed if any item is moved).
Autism spectrum disorder is not a degenerative disorder, and it is typical for learning and
compensation to continue throughout life. Symptoms are often most marked in early childhood
and early school years, with developmental gains typical in later childhood in at least some areas
(e.g., increased interest in social interaction). A small proportion of individuals deteriorate
behaviorally during adolescence, whereas most others improve. While it was once the case that
only a minority of individuals with autism spectrum disorder lived and worked independently in
adulthood, as diagnosis of autism spectrum

disorder is made more frequently in those who have superior language and intellectual
abilities, more individuals are able to find a niche that matches their special interests and skills
and thus are productively employed. Access to vocational rehabilitation services significantly
improves competitive employment outcomes for transition-age youth with autism spectrum
disorder.
In general, individuals with lower levels of impairment may be better able to function
independently. However, even these individuals may remain socially naive and vulnerable, have
difficulties organizing practical demands without aid, and are prone to anxiety and depression.
Many adults report using compensation strategies and coping mechanisms to mask their
difficulties in public but suffer from the stress and effort of maintaining a socially acceptable
facade. Relatively little is known about old age in autism spectrum disorder, but higher rates of
co-occurring medical conditions have been documented in the literature.
Some individuals come for first diagnosis in adulthood, perhaps prompted by the diagnosis of
autism in a child in the family or a breakdown of relations at work or home. Obtaining detailed
developmental history in such cases may be difficult, and it is important to consider self-reported
difficulties. Where clinical observation suggests criteria are currently met, autism spectrum
disorder may be diagnosed, particularly if supported by a history of poor social and
communication skills in childhood. A compelling report (by parents or another relative) that the
individual had ordinary and sustained reciprocal friendships and good nonverbal communication
skills throughout childhood would significantly lessen the likelihood of a diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder; however, ambiguous or absent developmental information in itself is not
sufficient to rule out a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
Manifestations of the social and communication impairments and restricted/repetitive
behaviors that define autism spectrum disorder are clear in the developmental period. In later
life, intervention or compensation, as well as current supports, may mask these difficulties in at
least some contexts. Overall, symptoms remain sufficient to cause current impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.