Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder. Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related to conduct
problems that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority figures (e.g.,
teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder are typically of a less
severe nature than those of conduct disorder and do not include aggression toward people or
animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit. However, evidence suggests that
oppositional defiant disorder is associated with equivalent or even greater levels of impairment
than conduct disorder. Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotion
dysregulation (i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct
disorder.
Adjustment disorder. Environmental and family stressors may be associated with externalizing
manifestations of emotion dysregulation. In children, these may manifest as

tantrums and oppositional behavior; and in adolescents, as aggressive behaviors (e.g., rebellion
and defiance). Temporal association with a stressor and symptom duration of less than 6 months
after the resolution of the stressor may help distinguish adjustment disorder from oppositional
defiant disorder.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. In children younger than 6 years, posttraumatic stress disorder may
manifest initially as dysregulated behaviors, opposition, and tantrums; the association with a
traumatic event and with other specific symptoms (traumatic play) are key to establishing the
diagnosis. In adolescents, traumatic reenactment and risk-taking may be misinterpreted as
defiance and opposition or as conduct problems.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. ADHD is often comorbid with oppositional defiant disorder.
To make the additional diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder, it is important to determine
that the individual’s failure to conform to requests of others is not solely in situations that
demand sustained effort and attention or demand that the individual sit still.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Depressive and bipolar disorders often involve negative affect
and irritability. As a result, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder should not be made if the
symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a mood disorder.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder shares with disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder the symptoms of chronic irritable mood and temper outbursts. However, if
the irritable mood and other symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is not given, even if all criteria for oppositional
defiant disorder are met.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Intermittent explosive disorder also involves high rates of anger.
However, individuals with this disorder show serious aggression toward others that is not part of
the definition of oppositional defiant disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability). In individuals with intellectual
developmental disorder, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is given only if the
oppositional behavior is markedly greater than is commonly observed among individuals of
comparable mental age and with comparable severity of intellectual disability.
Language disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from a failure to
follow directions that is the result of impaired language comprehension (e.g., hearing loss).
Social anxiety disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from defiance
because of fear of negative evaluation associated with social anxiety disorder.
Comorbidity
Rates of oppositional defiant disorder are much higher in samples of children, adolescents, and
adults with ADHD, and this may be the result of shared temperamental risk factors. Also,
oppositional defiant disorder often precedes conduct disorder, although this appears to be most
common in children with the childhood-onset subtype. Individuals with oppositional defiant
disorder are also at increased risk for anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder, and this
seems largely attributable to the presence of the angry-irritable mood symptoms. Extremely high
rates of comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and symptoms
characteristic of oppositional defiant disorder have been reported, with most individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder having symptoms that meet criteria for oppositional
defiant disorder (such as showing argumentative/defiant symptoms); but because oppositional
defiant disorder cannot be diagnosed if criteria are also met for disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, only disruptive mood dysregulation disorder would be diagnosed in such cases.
Adolescents and adults with oppositional defiant disorder also show a higher rate of substance
use disorders,

although it is unclear if this association is independent of the comorbidity with conduct disorder.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
F63.81
A. Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control aggressive
impulses as manifested by either of the following:
1. Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights)
or physical aggression toward property, animals, or other individuals,
occurring twice weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months. The physical
aggression does not result in damage or destruction of property and does not
result in physical injury to animals or other individuals.
2. Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction of property
and/or physical assault involving physical injury against animals or other
individuals occurring within a 12-month period.
B. The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent outbursts is
grossly out of proportion to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial
stressors.
C. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e., they are impulsive
and/or anger-based) and are not committed to achieve some tangible objective
(e.g., money, power, intimidation).
D. The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress in the individual
or impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or are associated with
financial or legal consequences.
E. Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent developmental level).
F. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder, a psychotic disorder, antisocial personality disorder,
borderline personality disorder) and are not attributable to another medical
condition (e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer’s disease) or to the physiological effects