Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of oppositional defiant disorder is a frequent and persistent pattern of
angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or vindictiveness (Criterion A). It is not
unusual for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show the behavioral features of the
disorder without problems of negative mood. However, individuals with the disorder who show
the angry/irritable mood symptoms typically show the behavioral features as well.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder may be confined to only one setting, and this
is most frequently the home. Individuals who show enough symptoms to meet the diagnostic
threshold, even if it is only at home, may be significantly impaired in their social functioning.
However, in more severe cases, the symptoms of the disorder are present in multiple settings.
Given that the pervasiveness of symptoms is an indicator of the severity of the disorder, it is
critical that the individual’s behavior be assessed across multiple settings and relationships.
Because these behaviors are common among siblings, they must be observed during interactions
with persons other than siblings. Also, because symptoms of the disorder are typically more
evident in interactions with adults or peers whom the individual knows well, they may not be
apparent during a clinical examination.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder can occur to some degree in persons without
this disorder. There are several key considerations for determining if the behaviors are
symptomatic of oppositional defiant disorder. First, the diagnostic threshold of four or more
symptoms within the preceding 6 months must be met. Second, the persistence and frequency of
the symptoms should exceed what is normative for an individual’s age, gender, and culture.
Temper outbursts for a preschool child would be considered a symptom of oppositional defiant
disorder only if they occurred on most days for the preceding 6 months, if they occurred with at
least three other symptoms of the disorder, and if the temper outbursts contributed to the
significant impairment associated with the disorder (e.g., led to destruction of property during
outbursts, resulted in the child being asked to leave a preschool). It should be noted that temper
loss need not always involve tantrum behavior and can be displayed by angry facial expressions,
verbal expressions of anger, and subjective feelings of anger that would not typically be
considered a tantrum.
The symptoms of the disorder often are part of a pattern of problematic interactions with
others. Furthermore, individuals with this disorder typically do not regard themselves as angry,
oppositional, or defiant. Instead, they often justify their behavior as a response to unreasonable
demands or circumstances. Thus, it can be difficult to disentangle the relative contribution of the
individual with the disorder to the problematic interactions he or she experiences. For example,
children with oppositional defiant disorder may have

experienced a history of hostile parenting, and it is often impossible to determine if the
child’s behavior caused the parents to act in a more hostile manner toward the child, if the
parents’ hostility led to the child’s problematic behavior, or if there was some combination of
both. Whether or not the clinician can separate the relative contributions of potential causal
factors should not influence whether the diagnosis is made. In the event that the child may be
living in particularly poor conditions where neglect or mistreatment may occur (e.g., in
institutional settings), clinical attention to reducing the contribution of the environment may be
helpful.