=== Autism Spectrum Disorder ===
Source: DSM-5-TR | Pages 154–168
============================================================

Social anxiety disorder. The symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder overlap with
those of social anxiety disorder. The differentiating feature is the timing of the onset of
symptoms. In social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the individual has never had effective
social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social communication skills developed
appropriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or distress about social interactions.

Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and global developmental delay. Social
communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global developmental delay or
intellectual developmental disorder, but a separate diagnosis is not given unless the social
communication deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations.
Unspecified Communication Disorder
F80.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of
communication disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for communication disorder or for any of the disorders in the
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified communication
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify
the reason that the criteria are not met for communication disorder or for a specific
neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is
insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria F84.0
A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple
contexts, as manifested by all of the following, currently or by history (examples
are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal
social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced
sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to
social interactions.
2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction,
ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal
communication; to abnormalities in eye contact and body language or deficits
in understanding and use of gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and
nonverbal communication.
3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging,
for example, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts;
to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of
interest in peers.
B. Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested
by at least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative,
not exhaustive; see text):
1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g.,
simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia,
idiosyncratic phrases).

2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized
patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small
changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals,
need to take same route or eat same food every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g.,
strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively
circumscribed or perseverative interests).
4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory
aspects of the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature,
adverse response to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or
touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement).
C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not
become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be
masked by learned strategies in later life).
D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of current functioning.
E. These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability) or global developmental delay. Intellectual
developmental disorder and autism spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to
make comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
developmental disorder, social communication should be below that expected for
general developmental level.
Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder,
Asperger’s disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified
should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have
marked deficits in social communication, but whose symptoms do not otherwise
meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should be evaluated for social
(pragmatic) communication disorder.
Specify current severity based on social communication impairments and restricted,
repetitive patterns of behavior (see Table 2):
Requiring very substantial support
Requiring substantial support
Requiring support
Specify if:
With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
With or without accompanying language impairment
Specify if:
Associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or
environmental factor (Coding note: Use additional code to identify the
associated genetic or other medical condition.)
Associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition) (Coding note: Use additional code F06.1
catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of
the comorbid catatonia.)

TABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder (examples of level of
support needs)
Severity level Social communication Restricted, repetitive behaviors
Level 3 Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty
communication skills cause severe impairments coping with change, or other
“Requiring very substantial
in functioning, very limited initiation of social restricted/repetitive behaviors markedly
support”
interactions, and minimal response to social interfere with functioning in all spheres.
overtures from others. For example, a person Great distress/difficulty changing focus or
with few words of intelligible speech who rarely action.
initiates interaction and, when he or she does,
makes unusual approaches to meet needs only
and responds to only very direct social
approaches.
Level 2 Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping
communication skills; social impairments with change, or other restricted/repetitive
“Requiring substantial
apparent even with supports in place; limited behaviors appear frequently enough to be
support”
initiation of social interactions; and reduced or obvious to the casual observer and
abnormal responses to social overtures from interfere with functioning in a variety of
others. For example, a person who speaks contexts. Distress and/or difficulty
simple sentences, whose interaction is limited to changing focus or action.
narrow special interests, and who has markedly
odd nonverbal communication.
Level 1 Without supports in place, deficits in social Inflexibility of behavior causes significant
communication cause noticeable impairments. interference with functioning in one or
“Requiring support”
Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear more contexts. Difficulty switching
examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses between activities. Problems of
to social overtures of others. May appear to organization and planning hamper
have decreased interest in social interactions. independence.
For example, a person who is able to speak in
full sentences and engages in communication
but whose to-and-fro conversation with others
fails, and whose attempts to make friends are
odd and typically unsuccessful.
Recording Procedures
It may be helpful to note level of support needed for each of the two core psychopathological
domains in Table 2 (e.g., “requiring very substantial support for deficits in social communication
and requiring substantial support for restricted, repetitive behaviors”). Specification of “with
accompanying intellectual impairment” or “without accompanying

intellectual impairment” should be recorded next. Language impairment specification should be
recorded thereafter. If there is accompanying language impairment, the current level of verbal
functioning should be recorded (e.g., “with accompanying language impairment—no intelligible
speech” or “with accompanying language impairment—phrase speech”).
For autism spectrum disorder for which the specifiers “associated with a known genetic or
other medical condition or environmental factor” or “associated with a neurodevelopmental,
mental, or behavioral problem” are appropriate, record autism spectrum disorder associated with
(name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with tuberous
sclerosis complex). These specifiers apply to presentations in which the listed condition or
problem is potentially relevant to the clinical care of the individual and do not necessarily
indicate that the condition or problem is causally related to the autism spectrum disorder. If the
associated neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem meets criteria for a
neurodevelopmental or other mental disorder, both autism spectrum disorder and the other
disorder should be diagnosed.
If catatonia is present, record separately “catatonia associated with autism spectrum
disorder.” For more information, see criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
Specifiers
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current
symptomatology (which might fall below level 1), with the recognition that severity may vary by
context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and restricted,
repetitive behaviors should be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories should not be
used to determine eligibility for and provision of services. Indeed, individuals with relatively
better skills overall may experience different or even greater psychosocial challenges. Thus,
service needs can only be developed at an individual level and through discussion of personal
priorities and targets.
Regarding the specifier “with or without accompanying intellectual impairment,”
understanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum
disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and
nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential strengths in
individuals with limited language).
To use the specifier “with or without accompanying language impairment,” the current level
of verbal functioning should be assessed and described. Examples of the specific descriptions for
“with accompanying language impairment” might include no intelligible speech (nonverbal),
single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals “without accompanying
language impairment” might be further described as speaks in full sentences or has fluent speech.
Since receptive language may lag behind expressive language development in autism spectrum
disorder, receptive and expressive language skills should be considered separately.
The specifier “associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental
factor” can be applied when an individual has a known genetic condition (e.g., Rett syndrome,
fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a known medical condition (e.g., epilepsy), or a history of
environmental exposure in utero to a known teratogen or infection (e.g., fetal valproate
syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal rubella). This specifier should not be viewed as
synonymous with causation of autism spectrum disorder. A condition may be listed as being
associated with autism spectrum disorder when it is thought to be potentially clinically relevant
or inform care and not because the clinician is asserting a cause. Examples include autism
spectrum disorder associated with a unique genomic copy number variant that could be clinically
relevant even if the specific abnormality may not have directly caused nor have previously been
linked to autism spectrum disorder, or Crohn’s disease, which could exacerbate behavioral
symptoms.

The specifier “associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem” can be
applied to indicate problems (e.g., irritability, sleep problems, self-injurious behavior, or
developmental regression) that contribute to the functional formulation or are a focus of
treatment. Additional neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorders should also be noted
as separate diagnoses (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination
disorder; disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or
bipolar disorders; tics or Tourette’s disorder; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders).
Catatonia can occur as a comorbid condition with autism spectrum disorder. In addition to
classic symptoms of posturing, negativism (opposition or no response to instructions or external
stimuli), mutism, and stupor, an increase or worsening of stereotypy and self-injurious behavior
may form part of the symptom complex of catatonia in the setting of autism spectrum disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal social
communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from early childhood
and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at which functional
impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of the individual and his or
her environment. Core diagnostic features are evident in the developmental period, but
intervention, compensation, and current supports may mask difficulties in at least some contexts.
Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly depending on the severity of the autistic
condition, developmental level, chronological age, and possibly gender; hence, the term
spectrum. Individuals without cognitive or language impairment may have more subtle
manifestation of deficits (e.g., Criterion A, Criterion B) than individuals with accompanying
intellectual or language impairments and may be making great efforts to mask these deficits.
Criterion A deficits in social communication will be more subtle if an individual has better
overall communication skills (e.g., is verbally fluent, does not have intellectual impairments).
Similarly, Criterion B deficits (i.e., restricted patterns of behavior and interests) may be less
obvious if the interests are closer to age-typical norms (e.g., Ancient Egypt or trains as compared
to wiggling a string). Autism spectrum disorder encompasses disorders previously referred to as
early infantile autism, childhood autism, Kanner’s autism, high-functioning autism, atypical
autism, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, childhood disintegrative
disorder, and Asperger’s disorder.
The impairments in social communication and social interaction specified in Criterion A are
pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most valid and reliable when based on multiple sources
of information, including clinician’s observations, caregiver history, and, when possible, self-
report. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying manifestations,
depending on the individual’s age, intellectual level, and language ability, as well as other factors
such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals have language deficits, ranging
from complete lack of speech through language delays, poor comprehension of speech, echoed
speech, or stilted and overly literal language. Even when formal language skills (e.g.,
vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for reciprocal social communication is
impaired in autism spectrum disorder.
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e., the ability to engage with others and share
thoughts and feelings) may be shown, for example, in young children with little or no initiation
of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with reduced or absent imitation of
others’ behavior. What language exists is often one-sided, lacking in social reciprocity, and used
to request or label rather than to comment, share feelings, or converse. In older children and
adults without intellectual impairments or language delays, deficits in

social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and responding
to complex social cues (e.g., when and how to join a conversation, what not to say). Individuals
who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still struggle in novel or
unsupported situations and suffer from the effort and anxiety of consciously calculating what is
socially intuitive for most individuals. This behavior may contribute to lower ascertainment of
autism spectrum disorder in these individuals, perhaps especially in adult women. Thus, longer
assessments, observation in naturalistic settings, and inquiring about any tolls of social
interaction may be needed. If asked about the costs of social interaction, for example, these
individuals might respond that social interactions are exhausting for them, that they are unable to
concentrate because of the mental effort in monitoring social conventions, that their self-esteem
is adversely affected by being unable to be themselves, and so forth.
Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction are manifested by
absent, reduced, or atypical use of eye contact (relative to cultural norms), gestures, facial
expressions, body orientation, or speech intonation. An early feature of autism spectrum disorder
is impaired joint attention as manifested by a lack of pointing, showing, or bringing objects to
share interest with others, or failure to follow someone’s pointing or eye gaze. Individuals may
learn a few functional gestures, but their repertoire is smaller than that of others, and they often
fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in communication. Among young people and adults
with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal communication with speech may
give the impression of odd, wooden, or exaggerated “body language” during interactions.
Impairment may be relatively subtle within individual modes (e.g., someone may have relatively
good eye contact when speaking) but noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body
posture, prosody, and facial expression for social communication, or in difficulty maintaining
these for sustained periods or when under stress.
Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships should be judged
against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atypical social
interest, manifested by rejection of others, passivity, or inappropriate approaches that seem
aggressive or disruptive. These difficulties are particularly evident in young children, in whom
there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g., age-appropriate flexible pretend
play) and, later, insistence on playing by very fixed rules. Older individuals may struggle to
understand what behavior is considered appropriate in one situation but not another (e.g., casual
behavior during a job interview), or the different ways that language may be used to
communicate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an apparent preference for solitary activities
or for interacting with much younger or older people. Frequently, there is a desire to establish
friendships without a complete or realistic idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sided
friendships or friendships based solely on shared special interests). Relationships with siblings,
coworkers, and caregivers are also important to consider (in terms of reciprocity).
Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations
according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive
behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flapping, finger flicking), repetitive use
of objects (e.g., spinning coins, lining up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echolalia, the delayed
or immediate parroting of heard words; use of “you” when referring to self; stereotyped use of
words, phrases, or prosodic patterns). Excessive adherence to routines and restricted patterns of
behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., distress at apparently small changes, such
as taking an alternative route to school or work; insistence on adherence to rules; rigidity of
thinking) or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., repetitive questioning,
pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests in autism spectrum disorder tend to be
abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., a toddler strongly attached to a pan or piece of string; a child
preoccupied with vacuum

cleaners; an adult spending hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines
may relate to apparent hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, manifested through extreme
responses to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination
with lights or spinning objects, and sometimes apparent indifference to pain, heat, or cold.
Extreme reaction to or rituals involving taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food or excessive
food restrictions are common and may be a presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder without intellectual or language
impairments learn to suppress repetitive behavior in public. In these individuals, repetitive
behaviors like rocking or finger flicking may serve an anxiolytic or self-soothing function.
Special interests may be a source of pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for
education and employment later in life. Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive
patterns of behavior, interests, or activities were clearly present during childhood or at some time
in the past, even if symptoms are no longer present.
Criterion D requires that the features must cause clinically significant impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of current functioning. Criterion E specifies that the social
communication deficits, although sometimes accompanied by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability), are not in line with the individual’s developmental level;
impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level.
Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties, including
caregiver interviews, questionnaires and clinician observation measures, are available and can
improve reliability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians. However, the symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder occur as dimensions without universally accepted cutoff scores for
what would constitute a disorder. Thus, the diagnosis remains a clinical one, taking all available
information into account, and is not solely dictated by the score on a particular questionnaire or
observation measure.
Associated Features
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual and/or language
impairment (e.g., slow to talk, language comprehension behind production). Even those with
average or high intelligence usually have an uneven profile of abilities. The gap between
intellectual and adaptive functional skills is often large. It is common for individuals with autism
to have theory-of-mind deficits (i.e., to have difficulty seeing the world from another person’s
perspective), but these are not necessarily present in all cases. Executive function deficits are
also common but not specific, as are difficulties with central coherence (i.e., being able to
understand context or to “see the big picture,” and thus tending to overfocus on detail).
Motor deficits are often present, including odd gait, clumsiness, and other abnormal motor
signs (e.g., walking on tiptoes). Self-injury (e.g., head banging, biting the wrist) may occur, and
disruptive/challenging behaviors are more common in children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder than other disorders, including intellectual developmental disorder. Some
individuals develop catatonic-like motor behavior (slowing and “freezing” mid-action), but these
are typically not of the magnitude of a catatonic episode. However, it is possible for individuals
with autism spectrum disorder to experience a marked deterioration in motor symptoms and
display a full catatonic episode with symptoms such as mutism, posturing, grimacing, and waxy
flexibility. The risk period for comorbid catatonia appears to be greatest in the adolescent years.
Prevalence
Frequencies for autism spectrum disorder across the United States have been reported to be
between 1% and 2% of the population, with similar estimates in child and adult

samples. However, prevalence appears to be lower among U.S. African American (1.1%) and
Latinx children (0.8%) compared with White children (1.3%), even after the effect of
socioeconomic resources is taken into account. The reported prevalence of autism spectrum
disorder may be affected by misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis, or underdiagnosis of individuals
from some ethnoracial backgrounds. Prevalence across non-U.S. countries has approached 1% of
the population (0.62% median global prevalence), without substantial variation based on
geographic region or ethnicity and across child and adult samples. Globally, the male:female
ratio in well-ascertained epidemiological samples appears to be 3:1, with concerns about
underrecognition of autism spectrum disorder in women and girls.
Development and Course
The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectrum disorder. The behavioral
features of autism spectrum disorder first become evident in early childhood, with some cases
presenting a lack of interest in social interaction in the first year of life. Symptoms are typically
recognized during the second year of life (age 12–24 months) but may be seen earlier than 12
months if developmental delays are severe, or noted later than 24 months if symptoms are more
subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information about early developmental
delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where skills have been lost, parents or
caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or
language skills. Typically, this would occur between ages 12 and 24 months.
Prospective studies demonstrate that in most cases the onset of autism spectrum disorder is
associated with declines in critical social and communication behaviors in the first 2 years of life.
Such declines in functioning are rare in other neurodevelopmental disorders and may be an
especially useful indicator of the presence of autism spectrum disorder. In rare cases, there is
developmental regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously
described as childhood disintegrative disorder), which is much more unusual and warrants more
extensive medical investigation (i.e., continuous spike and waves during slow-wave sleep
syndrome and Landau-Kleffner syndrome). Often included in these encephalopathic conditions
are losses of skills beyond social communication (e.g., loss of self-care, toileting, motor skills)
(see also Rett syndrome in the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this disorder).
First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language
development, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g.,
pulling individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g.,
carrying toys around but never playing with them), and unusual communication patterns (e.g.,
knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be suspected but is
typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors and the absence of
typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing young children have strong
preferences and enjoy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods, watching the same video multiple
times), distinguishing restricted and repetitive behaviors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum
disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The clinical distinction is based on the type, frequency,
and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a child who daily lines up objects for hours and is very
distressed if any item is moved).
Autism spectrum disorder is not a degenerative disorder, and it is typical for learning and
compensation to continue throughout life. Symptoms are often most marked in early childhood
and early school years, with developmental gains typical in later childhood in at least some areas
(e.g., increased interest in social interaction). A small proportion of individuals deteriorate
behaviorally during adolescence, whereas most others improve. While it was once the case that
only a minority of individuals with autism spectrum disorder lived and worked independently in
adulthood, as diagnosis of autism spectrum

disorder is made more frequently in those who have superior language and intellectual
abilities, more individuals are able to find a niche that matches their special interests and skills
and thus are productively employed. Access to vocational rehabilitation services significantly
improves competitive employment outcomes for transition-age youth with autism spectrum
disorder.
In general, individuals with lower levels of impairment may be better able to function
independently. However, even these individuals may remain socially naive and vulnerable, have
difficulties organizing practical demands without aid, and are prone to anxiety and depression.
Many adults report using compensation strategies and coping mechanisms to mask their
difficulties in public but suffer from the stress and effort of maintaining a socially acceptable
facade. Relatively little is known about old age in autism spectrum disorder, but higher rates of
co-occurring medical conditions have been documented in the literature.
Some individuals come for first diagnosis in adulthood, perhaps prompted by the diagnosis of
autism in a child in the family or a breakdown of relations at work or home. Obtaining detailed
developmental history in such cases may be difficult, and it is important to consider self-reported
difficulties. Where clinical observation suggests criteria are currently met, autism spectrum
disorder may be diagnosed, particularly if supported by a history of poor social and
communication skills in childhood. A compelling report (by parents or another relative) that the
individual had ordinary and sustained reciprocal friendships and good nonverbal communication
skills throughout childhood would significantly lessen the likelihood of a diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder; however, ambiguous or absent developmental information in itself is not
sufficient to rule out a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
Manifestations of the social and communication impairments and restricted/repetitive
behaviors that define autism spectrum disorder are clear in the developmental period. In later
life, intervention or compensation, as well as current supports, may mask these difficulties in at
least some contexts. Overall, symptoms remain sufficient to cause current impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The best established prognostic factors for individual outcome within autism spectrum disorder
are presence or absence of associated intellectual developmental disorder and language
impairment (e.g., functional language by age 5 years is a good prognostic sign) and additional
mental health problems. Epilepsy, as a comorbid diagnosis, is associated with greater intellectual
disability and lower verbal ability.
Environmental. A variety of risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders, such as advanced
parental age, extreme prematurity, or in utero exposures to certain drugs or teratogens like
valproic acid, may broadly contribute to risk of autism spectrum disorder.
Genetic and physiological. Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder have ranged from
37% to higher than 90%, based on twin concordance rates, and a more recent five-country cohort
estimated heritability at 80%. Currently, as many as 15% of cases of autism spectrum disorder
appear to be associated with a known genetic mutation, with different de novo copy number
variants or de novo mutations in specific genes associated with the disorder in different families.
However, even when a known genetic mutation is associated with autism spectrum disorder, it
does not appear to be fully penetrant (i.e., not all individuals with that same genetic abnormality
will develop autism spectrum disorder). Risk for the majority of cases appears to be polygenic,
with perhaps hundreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions. Whether these
findings apply to all racial/ethnic populations equally is unclear, given the limited inclusion of
communities of color in genetic research.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural differences exist in norms for social interaction, nonverbal communication, and
relationships, but individuals with autism spectrum disorder are markedly impaired against the
norms for their cultural context. Culture influences the perception of autistic behaviors, the
perceived salience of some behaviors over others, and the expectations for child behavior and
parenting practices. Considerable discrepancies are found in age at diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder in children from diverse ethnoracial backgrounds; most studies find delayed diagnosis
among socially oppressed ethnic and racialized children. In addition to being diagnosed later,
African American children are more often misdiagnosed with adjustment or conduct disorder
than are White children.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed three to four times more often in males than in females,
and on average, age at diagnosis is later in females. In clinic samples, females tend to be more
likely to show accompanying intellectual developmental disorder as well as epilepsy, suggesting
that girls without intellectual impairments or language delays may go unrecognized, perhaps
because of subtler manifestation of social and communication difficulties. In comparison with
males with autism spectrum disorder, females may have better reciprocal conversation, and be
more likely to share interests, to integrate verbal and nonverbal behavior, and to modify their
behavior by situation, despite having similar social understanding difficulties as males.
Attempting to hide or mask autistic behavior (e.g., by copying the dress, voice, and manner of
socially successful women) may also make diagnosis harder in some females. Repetitive
behaviors may be somewhat less evident in females than in males, on average, and special
interests may have a more social (e.g., a singer, an actor) or “normative” focus (e.g., horses),
while remaining unusual in their intensity. Relative to the general population, rates of gender
variance have been reported to be increased in autism spectrum disorder, with higher variance in
females compared with males.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder are at greater risk for suicide death compared with
those without autism spectrum disorder. Children with autism spectrum disorder who had
impaired social communication had a higher risk of self-harm with suicidal intent, suicidal
thoughts, and suicide plans by age 16 years as compared with those without impaired social
communication. Adolescents and young adults with autism spectrum disorder have an increased
risk of suicide attempts compared with age- and sex-matched control subjects, even after
adjustments for demographic factors and psychiatric comorbidities.
Functional Consequences of Autism Spectrum Disorder
In young children with autism spectrum disorder, lack of social and communication abilities may
hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings with peers. In the
home, insistence on routines and aversion to change, as well as sensory sensitivities, may
interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts, dental work) extremely
difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Extreme difficulties in planning,
organization, and coping with change negatively impact academic achievement, even for
students with above-average intelligence. During adulthood, these individuals may have
difficulties establishing independence because of continued rigidity and difficulty with novelty.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder, even without intellectual developmental
disorder, have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such

as independent living and gainful employment. Functional consequences in old age are
unknown, but social isolation and communication problems (e.g., reduced help-seeking) are
likely to have consequences for health in older adulthood.
Co-occurring intellectual developmental disorder, epilepsy, mental disorders, and chronic
medical conditions may be associated with a higher risk of premature mortality for individuals
with autism spectrum disorder. Deaths from injury and poisoning are higher than for the general
population, as are deaths from suicide. Drowning is the leading cause of accidental death in
children with autism spectrum disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or easily
distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hyperactivity.
Moreover, some individuals with ADHD may exhibit social communication deficits such as
interrupting others, speaking too loudly, and not respecting personal space. Although potentially
difficult to discriminate ADHD from autism spectrum disorder, the developmental course and
absence of restricted, repetitive behaviors and unusual interests in ADHD help in differentiating
the two conditions. A concurrent diagnosis of ADHD should be considered when attentional
difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in individuals of comparable mental age,
and ADHD is one of the most common comorbidities in autism spectrum disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) without autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual
developmental disorder without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to differentiate from
autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with intellectual developmental
disorder who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a challenge for
differential diagnosis, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individuals as well. A
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an individual with intellectual developmental disorder
is appropriate when social communication and interaction are significantly impaired relative to
the developmental level of the individual’s nonverbal skills (e.g., fine motor skills, nonverbal
problem solving). In contrast, intellectual developmental disorder is the appropriate diagnosis
when there is no apparent discrepancy between the level of social communicative skills and other
intellectual skills.
Language disorders and social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In some forms of language
disorder, there may be problems of communication and some secondary social difficulties.
However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnormal nonverbal
communication, nor with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or
activities.
When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions but
does not show restricted and repetitive behavior or interests, criteria for social (pragmatic)
communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of social (pragmatic) communication disorder
whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder are met, and care should be taken to enquire
carefully regarding past or current restricted/repetitive behavior.
Selective mutism. In selective mutism, early development is not typically disturbed. The affected
child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts and settings. Even in
settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired, nor are restricted or repetitive
patterns of behavior present.
Stereotypic movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic characteristics of
autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
given when such repetitive behaviors are better explained by the presence

of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a focus
of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate.
Rett syndrome. Disruption of social interaction may be observed during the regressive phase of
Rett syndrome (typically between ages 1 and 4 years); thus, a substantial proportion of affected
young girls may have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder.
However, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome improve their social
communication skills, and autistic features are no longer a major area of concern. Consequently,
autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all diagnostic criteria are met.
Symptoms associated with anxiety disorders. The overlap of anxiety symptoms with the core
symptoms of autism spectrum disorder can make the classification of anxiety symptoms in
autism spectrum disorder challenging. For example, social withdrawal and repetitive behaviors
are core features of autism spectrum disorder but may also be expressions of anxiety. The most
common anxiety disorders in autism spectrum disorder are specific phobia (in up to 30% of
cases), and social anxiety and agoraphobia (in as many as 17% of cases).
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Repetitive behavior is a defining feature of both obsessive-
compulsive disorder and autism spectrum disorder. In both conditions, repetitive behaviors are
considered to be inappropriate or odd. In obsessive-compulsive disorder, intrusive thoughts are
often related to contamination, organization, or sexual or religious themes. Compulsions are
performed in response to these intrusive thoughts in attempts to relieve anxiety. In autism
spectrum disorder, repetitive behaviors classically include more stereotyped motor behaviors,
such as hand flapping and finger shaking or more complex behaviors, such as insistence on
routines or lining up objects. Contrary to obsessive-compulsive disorder, repetitive behaviors in
autism spectrum disorder may be perceived as pleasurable and reinforcing.
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of normal, or
near normal, development. A prodromal state has been described in which social impairment and
atypical interests and beliefs occur, which could be confused with the social deficits and
restricted fixated interests seen in autism spectrum disorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which
are defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. However,
clinicians must take into account the potential for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to
be concrete in their interpretation of questions regarding the key features of schizophrenia (e.g.,
“Do you hear voices when no one is there?” ”Yes [on the radio]”). Autism spectrum disorder and
schizophrenia can co-occur, and both should be diagnosed when criteria are met.
Personality disorders. In adults without intellectual developmental disorder or significant
language impairment, some behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder may be
perceived by others as symptoms of narcissistic, schizotypal, or schizoid personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder in particular may intersect with autism spectrum disorder in
unusual preoccupations and perceptual experiences, odd thinking and speech, constricted affect
and social anxiety, lack of close friends, and odd or eccentric behavior. The early developmental
course of autism spectrum disorder (lack of imaginative play, restricted/repetitive behavior,
sensory sensitivities) is most helpful in differentiating it from personality disorders.
Comorbidity
Autism spectrum disorder is frequently associated with intellectual developmental disorder and
language disorder (i.e., an inability to comprehend and construct sentences with proper
grammar). Specific learning difficulties (literacy and numeracy) are common, as is
developmental coordination disorder.

Psychiatric comorbidities also co-occur in autism spectrum disorder. About 70% of
individuals with autism spectrum disorder may have one comorbid mental disorder, and 40%
may have two or more comorbid mental disorders. Anxiety disorders, depression, and ADHD are
particularly common. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is a fairly frequent presenting
feature of autism spectrum disorder, and extreme and narrow food preferences may persist.
Among individuals who are nonverbal or have language deficits, observable signs such as
changes in sleep or eating and increases in challenging behavior should trigger an evaluation for
anxiety or depression, as well as for potential pain or discomfort from undiagnosed medical or
dental problems. Medical conditions commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder
include epilepsy and constipation.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes
with functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):
1. Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at
least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and
that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational
activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior,
defiance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older
adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are
required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in
schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses
details, work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has
difficulty remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy
reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems
elsewhere, even in the absence of any obvious distraction).
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but
quickly loses focus and is easily sidetracked).
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing
sequential tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order;
messy, disorganized work; has poor time management; fails to meet
deadlines).
f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require
sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older
adolescents and adults, preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing
lengthy papers).
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials,
pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile