=== Oppositional Defiant Disorder ===
Source: DSM-5-TR | Pages 728–734
============================================================

disorder previously would have had symptoms that met criteria for oppositional defiant disorder,
at least in those cases in which conduct disorder emerges prior to adolescence. However, most
children with oppositional defiant disorder do not eventually develop conduct disorder.
Furthermore, children with

oppositional defiant disorder are at risk for eventually developing other problems besides
conduct disorder, including anxiety and depressive disorders.
Many of the symptoms that define the disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders are
behaviors that can occur to some degree in typically developing persons. Thus, it is critical that
the frequency, persistence, pervasiveness across situations, and impairment associated with the
behaviors indicative of the diagnosis be considered relative to what is normative for a person’s
age, gender, and culture when determining if they are symptomatic of a disorder.
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders have been linked to a common
externalizing spectrum associated with the personality dimensions of disinhibition and negative
emotionality (some facets); and inversely with constraint and agreeableness. These shared
personality dimensions could account for the high level of comorbidity among these disorders
and their frequent comorbidity with substance use disorders and antisocial personality disorder.
However, the specific nature of the shared diathesis that constitutes the externalizing spectrum
remains unknown.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
F91.3
A. A pattern of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or
vindictiveness lasting at least 6 months as evidenced by at least four symptoms
from any of the following categories, and exhibited during interaction with at least
one individual who is not a sibling.
Angry/Irritable Mood
1. Often loses temper.
2. Is often touchy or easily annoyed.
3. Is often angry and resentful.
Argumentative/Defiant Behavior
4. Often argues with authority figures or, for children and adolescents, with
adults.
5. Often actively defies or refuses to comply with requests from authority figures
or with rules.
6. Often deliberately annoys others.
7. Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior.
Vindictiveness
8. Has been spiteful or vindictive at least twice within the past 6 months.
Note: The persistence and frequency of these behaviors should be used to
distinguish a behavior that is within normal limits from a behavior that is
symptomatic. For children younger than 5 years, the behavior should occur on
most days for a period of at least 6 months unless otherwise noted (Criterion
A8). For individuals 5 years or older, the behavior should occur at least once
per week for at least 6 months, unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). While
these frequency criteria provide guidance on a minimal level of frequency to
define symptoms, other factors should also be considered, such as whether the
frequency and intensity of the behaviors are outside a range that is normative
for the individual’s developmental level, gender, and culture.
B. The disturbance in behavior is associated with distress in the individual or others
in his or her immediate social context (e.g., family, peer group, work colleagues),
or it impacts negatively on social, educational, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.

C. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic,
substance use, depressive, or bipolar disorder. Also, the criteria are not met for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Symptoms are confined to only one setting (e.g., at home, at school, at
work, with peers).
Moderate: Some symptoms are present in at least two settings.
Severe: Some symptoms are present in three or more settings.
Specifiers
It is not uncommon for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show symptoms only at
home and only with family members. However, the pervasiveness of the symptoms is an
indicator of the severity of the disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of oppositional defiant disorder is a frequent and persistent pattern of
angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or vindictiveness (Criterion A). It is not
unusual for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show the behavioral features of the
disorder without problems of negative mood. However, individuals with the disorder who show
the angry/irritable mood symptoms typically show the behavioral features as well.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder may be confined to only one setting, and this
is most frequently the home. Individuals who show enough symptoms to meet the diagnostic
threshold, even if it is only at home, may be significantly impaired in their social functioning.
However, in more severe cases, the symptoms of the disorder are present in multiple settings.
Given that the pervasiveness of symptoms is an indicator of the severity of the disorder, it is
critical that the individual’s behavior be assessed across multiple settings and relationships.
Because these behaviors are common among siblings, they must be observed during interactions
with persons other than siblings. Also, because symptoms of the disorder are typically more
evident in interactions with adults or peers whom the individual knows well, they may not be
apparent during a clinical examination.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder can occur to some degree in persons without
this disorder. There are several key considerations for determining if the behaviors are
symptomatic of oppositional defiant disorder. First, the diagnostic threshold of four or more
symptoms within the preceding 6 months must be met. Second, the persistence and frequency of
the symptoms should exceed what is normative for an individual’s age, gender, and culture.
Temper outbursts for a preschool child would be considered a symptom of oppositional defiant
disorder only if they occurred on most days for the preceding 6 months, if they occurred with at
least three other symptoms of the disorder, and if the temper outbursts contributed to the
significant impairment associated with the disorder (e.g., led to destruction of property during
outbursts, resulted in the child being asked to leave a preschool). It should be noted that temper
loss need not always involve tantrum behavior and can be displayed by angry facial expressions,
verbal expressions of anger, and subjective feelings of anger that would not typically be
considered a tantrum.
The symptoms of the disorder often are part of a pattern of problematic interactions with
others. Furthermore, individuals with this disorder typically do not regard themselves as angry,
oppositional, or defiant. Instead, they often justify their behavior as a response to unreasonable
demands or circumstances. Thus, it can be difficult to disentangle the relative contribution of the
individual with the disorder to the problematic interactions he or she experiences. For example,
children with oppositional defiant disorder may have

experienced a history of hostile parenting, and it is often impossible to determine if the
child’s behavior caused the parents to act in a more hostile manner toward the child, if the
parents’ hostility led to the child’s problematic behavior, or if there was some combination of
both. Whether or not the clinician can separate the relative contributions of potential causal
factors should not influence whether the diagnosis is made. In the event that the child may be
living in particularly poor conditions where neglect or mistreatment may occur (e.g., in
institutional settings), clinical attention to reducing the contribution of the environment may be
helpful.
Associated Features
Two of the most common co-occurring conditions with oppositional defiant disorder are
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and conduct disorder (see the section
“Comorbidity” for this disorder). Oppositional defiant disorder has been associated with
increased risk for suicide attempts, even after comorbid disorders are controlled for.
Prevalence
The cross-national prevalence of oppositional defiant disorder ranges from 1% to 11%, with an
average prevalence estimate of around 3.3%. The rate of oppositional defiant disorder may vary
depending on the age and gender of the child. The disorder appears to be somewhat more
prevalent in boys than in girls (1.59:1) prior to adolescence. This male predominance is not
consistently found in samples of adolescents or adults.
Development and Course
The first symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder usually appear during the preschool years
and rarely later than early adolescence. Oppositional defiant disorder often precedes the
development of conduct disorder, especially for those with the childhood-onset type of conduct
disorder. However, many children and adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder do not
subsequently develop conduct disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder also conveys risk for the
development of anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder, even in the absence of conduct
disorder. The defiant, argumentative, and vindictive symptoms carry most of the risk for conduct
disorder, whereas the angry/irritable mood symptoms carry most of the risk for mood and
anxiety disorders.
Manifestations of the disorder across development appear consistent. Children and
adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder are at increased risk for a number of problems in
adjustment as adults, including functional impairments (e.g., problems in relationships with
family, peers, and romantic partners; lower educational attainment; more workplace stress), the
persistence of oppositional defiant disorder, and other psychopathology, such as antisocial
behavior, impulse-control problems, substance misuse, anxiety, and depression.
Many of the behaviors associated with oppositional defiant disorder increase in frequency
during the preschool period and in adolescence. Thus, it is especially critical during these
development periods that the frequency and intensity of these behaviors be evaluated against
normative levels before it is decided that they are symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder. For
example, it is not unusual for preschool children to show temper tantrums on a weekly basis, but
daily tantrums occur in only about 10% of preschool children.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Temperamental factors related to problems in emotional regulation (e.g., high
levels of emotional reactivity, poor frustration tolerance) have been predictive of the disorder.

Environmental. Children with oppositional defiant disorder influence their environments, which
in turn can influence them. For example, harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-rearing practices
predict increases in symptoms, and oppositional symptoms predict increases in harsh and
inconsistent parenting. In children and adolescents, oppositional defiant disorder is more
prevalent in families in which childcare is disrupted by a succession of different caregivers.
Children with oppositional defiant disorder are also at greater risk for both bullying peers and
being bullied by peers.
Genetic and physiological. A number of neurobiological markers (e.g., lower heart rate and skin
conductance reactivity; reduced basal cortisol reactivity; abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex
and amygdala) have been associated with oppositional defiant disorder. Studies have
demonstrated overlapping genetic influences for the irritability and anger symptoms of
oppositional defiant disorder with depression and generalized anxiety disorder. To date, the vast
majority of studies have not separated children with oppositional defiant disorder from those
with conduct disorder. Further study of markers specific to oppositional defiant disorder is
needed.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The reported prevalence of oppositional defiant disorder or other disruptive disorders may be
affected by misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of individuals from some cultural backgrounds. Social
norms may affect the prevalence of the disorder and its male gender predominance in children
and adolescents. A meta-analysis of prevalence rates in middle childhood found that the disorder
is more common in boys compared with girls in Western cultures, but that the prevalence is
similar across genders in non-Western cultures. Also, despite adverse experiences, first-
generation migrants and refugees may be at decreased risk of developing oppositional defiant
disorder symptoms.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some studies find few sex or gender differences for this disorder compared with, for example,
conduct disorder. There may be slight differences in risk factors with harsh parenting more
highly associated with oppositional defiant disorder in girls but not boys.
Functional Consequences of Oppositional Defiant Disorder
When oppositional defiant disorder is persistent throughout development, individuals with the
disorder experience frequent conflicts with parents, teachers, supervisors, peers, and romantic
partners. Such problems often result in significant impairments in the individual’s emotional,
social, academic, and occupational adjustment.
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder. Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related to conduct
problems that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority figures (e.g.,
teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder are typically of a less
severe nature than those of conduct disorder and do not include aggression toward people or
animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit. However, evidence suggests that
oppositional defiant disorder is associated with equivalent or even greater levels of impairment
than conduct disorder. Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotion
dysregulation (i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct
disorder.
Adjustment disorder. Environmental and family stressors may be associated with externalizing
manifestations of emotion dysregulation. In children, these may manifest as

tantrums and oppositional behavior; and in adolescents, as aggressive behaviors (e.g., rebellion
and defiance). Temporal association with a stressor and symptom duration of less than 6 months
after the resolution of the stressor may help distinguish adjustment disorder from oppositional
defiant disorder.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. In children younger than 6 years, posttraumatic stress disorder may
manifest initially as dysregulated behaviors, opposition, and tantrums; the association with a
traumatic event and with other specific symptoms (traumatic play) are key to establishing the
diagnosis. In adolescents, traumatic reenactment and risk-taking may be misinterpreted as
defiance and opposition or as conduct problems.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. ADHD is often comorbid with oppositional defiant disorder.
To make the additional diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder, it is important to determine
that the individual’s failure to conform to requests of others is not solely in situations that
demand sustained effort and attention or demand that the individual sit still.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Depressive and bipolar disorders often involve negative affect
and irritability. As a result, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder should not be made if the
symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a mood disorder.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder shares with disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder the symptoms of chronic irritable mood and temper outbursts. However, if
the irritable mood and other symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is not given, even if all criteria for oppositional
defiant disorder are met.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Intermittent explosive disorder also involves high rates of anger.
However, individuals with this disorder show serious aggression toward others that is not part of
the definition of oppositional defiant disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability). In individuals with intellectual
developmental disorder, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is given only if the
oppositional behavior is markedly greater than is commonly observed among individuals of
comparable mental age and with comparable severity of intellectual disability.
Language disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from a failure to
follow directions that is the result of impaired language comprehension (e.g., hearing loss).
Social anxiety disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from defiance
because of fear of negative evaluation associated with social anxiety disorder.
Comorbidity
Rates of oppositional defiant disorder are much higher in samples of children, adolescents, and
adults with ADHD, and this may be the result of shared temperamental risk factors. Also,
oppositional defiant disorder often precedes conduct disorder, although this appears to be most
common in children with the childhood-onset subtype. Individuals with oppositional defiant
disorder are also at increased risk for anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder, and this
seems largely attributable to the presence of the angry-irritable mood symptoms. Extremely high
rates of comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and symptoms
characteristic of oppositional defiant disorder have been reported, with most individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder having symptoms that meet criteria for oppositional
defiant disorder (such as showing argumentative/defiant symptoms); but because oppositional
defiant disorder cannot be diagnosed if criteria are also met for disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, only disruptive mood dysregulation disorder would be diagnosed in such cases.
Adolescents and adults with oppositional defiant disorder also show a higher rate of substance
use disorders,

although it is unclear if this association is independent of the comorbidity with conduct disorder.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
F63.81
A. Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control aggressive
impulses as manifested by either of the following:
1. Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights)
or physical aggression toward property, animals, or other individuals,
occurring twice weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months. The physical
aggression does not result in damage or destruction of property and does not
result in physical injury to animals or other individuals.
2. Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction of property
and/or physical assault involving physical injury against animals or other
individuals occurring within a 12-month period.
B. The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent outbursts is
grossly out of proportion to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial
stressors.
C. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e., they are impulsive
and/or anger-based) and are not committed to achieve some tangible objective
(e.g., money, power, intimidation).
D. The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress in the individual
or impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or are associated with
financial or legal consequences.
E. Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent developmental level).
F. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder, a psychotic disorder, antisocial personality disorder,
borderline personality disorder) and are not attributable to another medical
condition (e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer’s disease) or to the physiological effects